# Command Line Interface Binding

Copyright 2023 Travis J. West, https://traviswest.ca, Input Devices and Music Interaction Laboratory
(IDMIL), Centre for Interdisciplinary Research in Music Media and Technology
(CIRMMT), McGill University, Montréal, Canada, and Univ. Lille, Inria, CNRS,
Centrale Lille, UMR 9189 CRIStAL, F-59000 Lille, France

SPDX-License-Identifier: MIT

[TOC]

# Motivation

Especially while debugging, testing, or prototyping, the easiest available
interface to interact with a device is often a text-based console. It is
generally easier to spit ASCII across a serial interface than to work with USB,
Bluetooth, Wi-Fi, Ethernet, or any other transmission protocol, both in terms
of setting up the hardware, and connecting to it from a PC. A text-based
console can also be used as a test environment when embedded hardware
processors are not involved. For these reasons, one of the first bindings to be
implemented was this command line interface.

# Design Reasoning

What we would like to achieve is for the endpoints of a simple processor, or
multiple such processors, e.g. the components of the one-bit bongo described in
another directory of the project, to have their endpoints exposed over a
text-based command line interface. 

## Portability

We would like the code that implements this binding to reflect generically over
the endpoints of the component without having to explicitly name them in source
code, so that the binding can readily adapt to arbitrary components. We would
like the binding to work with minimal repetition when running the component in
a simulated environment, where all input and output come through the command
line, and when running it as a hardware device, where some inputs and outputs
are generated by external hardware events, and where the command line is
physically realized across a serial port interface. Eventually, other
interfaces for command-line interaction are easy to imagine, such as a
web-based command line for advanced debugging.

## Basic Functionality

We would like to be able to query the current value of an endpoint, and set the
value of destination endpoints. For instance, we might issue the command `get
Button-Edge-Detector button-state` and receive the response `true` or `false`.
We could change the button state by issuing the command `set
button-edge-detector button-state true`. For testing and debugging, we would
like to be able to trigger execution of a components's processing, e.g. by
issuing the command `trigger button-edge-detector`.

We would like to be able to query the metadata of a component and its endoints:

```sh
> describe button-gesture-model
inputs:
    button-state: bool
    # etc.
outputs:
    rising-edge: bool
    falling-edge: bool
    any-edge: bool
    # etc.
```

We would like to be able to get a list of all the components that can be
interacted with by the command line interface:

```sh
> list
gpio-pin
button-gesture-model
# etc.
```

And finally, we would like to be able to get a list of all the CLI commands:

```sh
> help
# @='help text'
list
    Get a list of componentss.
describe <component>
    Print the metadata associated with a component
get <component> <endpoint>
    Print the current state of an endpoint
set <component> <endpoint> <value>
    Change the current state of an endpoint
trigger <component>
    Run a component's process
help
    Print a helpful list of commands
# @/
```

## Commands

### Commands as Shell Programs

For maximum portability, it seems likely that a character-by-character approach
will provide the easiest adaptability to different environments. The most obvious
approach to me is to accumulate characters until a full line of input is collected
(or the buffer overflows), and then tokenize that line of input and attempt to
match it to known commands. If a match is found, then control can flow to that
command, passing the whole command line as input to it.

So I am imagining a pipeline roughly like this:

```
accumulate inputs(character)
    buffer[write_position++] = character
    if character == '\n'
        parse line
        write_position = 0
    else if write_position == buffer size
        complain about buffer overflow
        write_position = 0

parse line(line)
    command = get_first_token()
    switch (command)
        execute command with line as input
```

Notice that the commands are effectively self contained programs. In principle,
each command could do almost anything. Given this, we may wish to adopt a familiar
convention for the interface to a command. We can imagine, for instance, the
following abstract base class for all commands:

```cpp
struct ShellProgram
{
    virtual int main(int argc, char ** argv) = 0;
};
```

This implies that we are treating our CLI like an OS shell, and our CLI
commands as executable programs. This analogy is a bit strained under the
actual expected environment, where the commands are compiled into the CLI,
which runs as a binding in e.g. the firmware of a digital musical instrument.
This is a far cry from the shell of an OS, where the commands are separately
compiled programs in the path of the shell. For one thing, our `ShellProgram`s
can't reasonably assume that there are any common OS facilities available, like
`printf` or `std::cout`, which would normally be included by a shell program's
source code and dynamically linked to a library on the system.

### Printing Through Ports

With respect to our main target environment (i.e. firmware) and its
constraints, our CLI commands might more reasonably adopt an interface that
acknowledges the requirements we're trying to address. We only need our CLI
commands to interact with the bound components, to parse their command-specific
CLI arguments, and to write text to the text output. We should also try not
to get ahead of ourselves. Our immediate need is a simple CLI for basic
debugging and testing purposes. It would be inappropriate to start building a
general-purpose shell scripting environment at this point. It's tempting to try
to develop a `ShellProgram` API that is independent of this basic CLI, but to
do so would be premature at this time.

At the same time, some of the facilities we develop here may be useful across
other components. Many components, like our CLI commands, may require some way of
outputting errors, error messages, and other text logs. We might consider
treating these as `outputs` in the same way we treat other output signals:

```cpp
struct CliCommand
{
    static _consteval auto name() { return "Example Command"; }

    struct outputs_t
    {
        struct stdout_t
        {
            static _consteval auto name() { return "standard text output"; }
            const char * value;
        } stdout;
    } outputs;

    void main(int argc, char ** argv); // return code is now an output port
};
```

The main problem with this approach is that the memory for string-type outputs
needs to be managed somehow, even though in principle there should be no real
need to store whole messages. In an embedded context, bytes can most likely
be sent more or less as needed, and buffering should in any case be handled by
the serial interface's drivers, not the component sending the message. In an
environment with an operating system, the OS should handle buffering of messages.
In general, the component is not well suited to deal with this concern. Particularly
in an embedded context, where it may be inappropriate to use automatically
memory-managed containers from the standard library (e.g. `std::string_stream`
seems obviously relevant), the burden of memory management can be significant.

For simple components with very basic logging needs, e.g. if all messages that may
ever be logged are known at compile time, a string-typed output port may still
be useful. But in case the messages incorporate runtime information, this
approach is probably not satisfactory.

For some commands, generating their entire possible output at compile time is
very likely achievable. However, while this might work well enough in case of a
component running on a PC, where program memory is abundant, the resulting
duplication of strings is likely not tolerable in many embedded systems. For
instance, if the message for the `list` command were statically generated at
compile time, it would result in the duplication of the names of every component
bound to the CLI. This kind of duplication would very likely add up quickly
until it starts to crowd out more important functionality.

### Printing Through Feature Injection

What is needed is a way to pass in a function that can accept a string and
immediately print it or buffer it for printing with the appropriate driver. In
the current version of [Avendish](github.com/celtera/avendish) at the time of
writing, this is accomplished through a dependency injection mechanism where
the component or command in need of logging functionality accepts a template
parameter that provides a logger type that the component can instantiate to
access the needed functionality through a member function call of the
instantiated type. This exposes the core of the only reasonable approach.
Effectively, the only way to explicitly pass the thread of execution from one
place to another is through a function call. So here are some of the options

- the component author includes the function(s) for printing
- the component user inherits from the component and overrides its virtual printing method(s)
- the component stores a callback function pointer or pointer to class that is called on for printing
- the printing function or class is passed as a template parameter to the component
- the printing function or class is passed as an argument to the component's main subroutine

In all cases, the component author and binding author are forced to agree on a
convention for the printing calls. There's no getting around that. In the first
case, the hardware specific printer is determined at link time; we would prefer
to make this choice explicit in source code. In the second case, an abundance
of near-identical subclassing is likely to abound, as the binding author
subclasses every component to work with every feature that needs to be
injected--quadratic glue code in other words, and we are not willing to accept
that. A class pointer could work; the component author would include an abstract
base class, and then the binding author can provide subclasses for each
hardware specific driver. There's no glue code, but this approach inextricably
links the component implementation to that abstract base, which becomes pulled in
as an explicit physical dependency of the component. This is a level of
frameworkization that we would prefer to avoid. A function callback could work,
except it would require the component author to match all material for printing to
one function call signature, e.g. `void (*print)(char * str)`. This means that
the responsibility for converting any data that needs to be printed into a
`char * str` falls on the component author. We would prefer for them to be able to
focus on writing their component without having to think about string formatting
conversions.

The approach taken in Avendish at the time of writing is the template class
parameter. The dependency is passed as a type in the scope of a class parameter
of the component, e.g. `template<class Config> struct mycomponent {...};`, and
an instance of the depency type is instantiated as a member variable of the
component e.g. `[[no_unique_address]] typename Config::logger_type log;`. This
is somewhat better than a pointer to a class. In both cases, the component
author admits a dependency on the call signature requirements of the logger.
The template parameter option has these main advantages: the dependency is
implicit, meaning that it is simpler for binding authors to meet the
requirements without modifying the component's implementation or satisfy a
certain binary-level API, and the component and binding implementations aren't
required to share any source code; the injection of the feature imposes no
runtime cost, since the full signature of the printer and component are both
known at compile time, so there's no indirection through a base class; and
compile time injection also enables stronger type checking, and potentially
allows the binding author to enable optimization through compile-time
programming and template metaprogramming, if applicable. The cost is likely in
compilation time, since the component code has to be recompiled for every
different printer. However, in this context that
cost is negligible, since we're already committed to recompiling our components
for each new binding. It's also a bit awkward to instantiate the dependency,
requiring the attribute `[[no_unique_address]]` to advise the compiler that the
instance may not take any space, and the type declaration `typename
Config::deptype` to access the nested type name. This approach is what is
termed an *internal plugin* in `sygaldry`, describe at a higher level in
`concepts/README.md`.

The design of the printer is addressed in its own directory.

### Reading Through Dependency Injection

Just as sending text to the serial console output is best achieved through
an internal plugin, so it reading text from the console input. The serial
reader is defined in its own directory.

### Summary

So we have moved from considering our CLI commands as general purpose shell
programs, to restricting that view to see them as mere text outputters, to once
again broadening our view to see them as general purpose
reflectable-aggregate-type components with textual output ports, to recognizing
that text output requires feature injection, preferably through a template
parameter, to avoid glue code, forcing explicit dependencies on the component, and
added runtime costs. This leads to the following plan, demonstrated with a
simple `echo` command, for the commands' general interface, borrowing the
conceptual design of the logger feature injection scheme from Avendish:

```cpp
// @+'test commands'
struct Echo
{
    static _consteval auto name() { return "/echo"; }
    static _consteval auto description() { return "Repeats its arguments, separated by spaces, to the output"; }

    int main(int argc, char ** argv, auto& log, auto&)
    {
        for (int i = 1; i < argc; ++i)
        {
            log.print(argv[i]);
            if (i + 1 < argc) log.print(" ");
        }
        log.println();
        return 0;
    };
};
// @/
```

# CLI

As described above, the CLI provides a fairly limited amount of behavior. It's
main role is to simply accumulate inputs until a full line is available,
try to match the first token in the line to a command, and execute it if a match
is found.

## Tests

We'll define a function to facilitate testing that accepts a string as input to
the CLI and returns a string representing whatever the CLI prints in response.
We also define some test components;

```cpp
// @='cli test wrapper'
void test_cli(auto& cli, auto& components, string input, string expected_output)
{
    cli.log.put.ss.str("");
    cli.reader.ss.str(input);
    cli.external_sources(components);
    REQUIRE(cli.log.put.ss.str() == expected_output);
}
// @/

// @='test components'
struct Component1 {
    static _consteval auto name() { return "Test Component A"; }
    void main() {}
};

struct Component2 {
    static _consteval auto name() { return "Test Component B"; }
    void main() {}
};

struct TestComponents
{
    Component1 cpt1;
    Component2 cpt2;
    sygaldry::components::TestComponent tc;
};
// @/
```

We can then test the CLI using a few trivial commands, such as the `echo` command
defined above, and the following:

```cpp
// @+'test commands'
struct HelloWorld
{
    static _consteval auto name() { return "/hello"; }
    static _consteval auto description() { return "Say's 'Hello world!' Useful for testing the CLI"; }

    int main(int argc, char ** argv, auto& log, auto&)
    {
        log.println("Hello world!");
        return 0;
    };
};
// @/

// @+'tests'
struct CliCommands
{
    Echo echo;
    HelloWorld hello;
};

TEST_CASE("CLI", "[bindings][cli]")
{
    auto components = TestComponents{};
    auto cli = CustomCli<TestReader, TestLogger, TestComponents, CliCommands>{};
    static_assert(Component<decltype(cli)>);

    SECTION("Hello world")
    {
        test_cli(cli, components, "/hello\n", "Hello world!\n> ");
    }

    SECTION("Echo")
    {
        test_cli(cli, components, "/echo foo bar baz\n", "foo bar baz\n> ");
    }
}
// @/
```

## Implementation

### Buffers

We'll statically allocate some buffers as class member variables to hold the
incoming characters, a count of tokens found, and pointers to the beginnings
of the tokens. For now, the size of the buffers is determined heuristically.
Ideally we should iterate over the commands at compile time and determine
exactly how big these buffers need to be, but this is left as future work
for now:

```cpp
// @='cli buffers'
// TODO: automatically size the buffers depending on the commands
static constexpr size_t MAX_ARGS = 5;
static constexpr size_t BUFFER_SIZE = 128;
int argc = 0;
char * argv[MAX_ARGS];
unsigned char write_pos = 0;
char buffer[BUFFER_SIZE];
// @/
```

### Process loop

With these resources, we can outline the process function. The plan is to
keep track of the onset of arguments in `argv`, and to convert whitespace
to null characters so that the arguments are automatically null terminated.

At the end of each line, we try to match the first command line argument to one
of the commands known to the CLI. Then, regardless of the command's exit
status, we reset the buffers, print a new prompt, and return to the normal
process loop. The same reset routine is called if our input buffer overflows.

Notice that we accept the list of components which the CLI interacts with as an
argument. We assume that this is in the form of a reflectable simple-aggregate
struct, which we will discuss further below.

On ESP-IDF, we need to echo user input back to the log output so that the user
has feedback as they write. Ideally we would implement a full readline REPL,
but this remains as future work for now.

```cpp
// @='cli process'
void process(const char c, Components& components)
{
    if (_is_whitespace(c))
        buffer[write_pos++] = 0;
    else
    {
        buffer[write_pos] = c;
        if (_new_arg())
            argv[argc++] = &buffer[write_pos];
        write_pos++;
    }

    #ifdef ESP_PLATFORM
    char s[2] = {0,0};
    s[0] = c;
    log.print(s);
    #endif

    if (c == '\n')
    {
        _try_to_match_and_execute(components);
        _reset();
    }

    if (_overflow())
    {
        log.println("CLI line buffer overflow!");
        _reset();
    }
}

void external_sources(Components& components)
{
    while(reader.ready()) process(reader.getchar(), components);
}
// @/
```

An earlier version of the CLI used a purpose-specific name-matching dispatcher
that has since been removed in favor of using the
[`osc_match_pattern`](bindings/osc_match_pattern.lili.md) subroutine defined in
the document with the same name. Command names are treated as OSC strings, and
any command that matches the first CLI argument is invoked, passing the CLI
arguments, log, and components. The help command is a special case; it requires
the list of commands be passed rather than the list of components.

```cpp
// @+'cli implementation details'
void _try_to_match_and_execute(Components& components)
{
    boost::pfr::for_each_field(commands, [&](auto& command)
    {
        if (not osc_match_pattern(argv[0], command.name())) return;
        int retcode;
        if constexpr (std::is_same_v<decltype(command), clicommands::Help&>)
        {
            retcode = command.main(log, commands);
        }
        else retcode = command.main(argc, argv, log, components);
        if (retcode != 0) _complain_about_command_failure(retcode);
    });
}
// @/
```

### Instantiation

The CLI is a template that can accept an arbitrary number of components and
commands, and requires a logger that is passed through to all of its
commands. Being able to instantiate the CLI without having to restate the names
all of the components and commands is essential.

To facilitate this, we require the components and commands to be wrapped in a
reflectable struct. We further assume that the list of commands will, by
default, be all available commands, but that (particularly for testing) some
clients will want to specify their own list of commands. For this reason, the
main CLI implementation is contained in a class `CustomCli`, for which a
template alias is provided `Cli` that specifies the default list of commands.
By the same sort of reasoning, we also provide a template alias that
incorporates the `cstdio` input/output plugins.

```cpp
// @='cli default type alias'
struct DefaultCommands
{
    @{default commands}
};

template<typename Reader, typename Logger, typename Components>
using Cli = CustomCli<Reader, Logger, Components, DefaultCommands>;

template<typename Components>
using CstdioCli = Cli<CstdioReader, CstdioLogger, Components>;
// @/
```

### Details

```cpp
// @+'cli implementation details'
bool _is_whitespace(char c)
{
    if (c == ' ' || c == '\t' || c == '\n') return true;
    else return false;
}

bool _new_arg() const
{
    return write_pos == 0 || buffer[write_pos-1] == 0;
}

bool _overflow() const
{
    return argc == MAX_ARGS || write_pos == BUFFER_SIZE;
}

void _prompt()
{
    log.print("> ");
}

void _reset()
{
    argc = 0;
    write_pos = 0;
    _prompt();
}

void _complain_about_command_failure(int retcode)
{} // TODO
// @/
```

### CLI Summary

```cpp
// @#'cli.hpp'
#pragma once
/*
Copyright 2023 Travis J. West, https://traviswest.ca, Input Devices and Music Interaction Laboratory
(IDMIL), Centre for Interdisciplinary Research in Music Media and Technology
(CIRMMT), McGill University, Montréal, Canada, and Univ. Lille, Inria, CNRS,
Centrale Lille, UMR 9189 CRIStAL, F-59000 Lille, France

SPDX-License-Identifier: MIT
*/

#include <memory>
#include <string_view>
#include <concepts>
#include <cstdlib>
#include "utilities/consteval.hpp"
#include "helpers/metadata.hpp"
#include "bindings/osc_match_pattern.hpp"
#include "bindings/basic_logger/cstdio_logger.hpp"
#include "bindings/basic_reader/cstdio_reader.hpp"

@{commands headers}

namespace sygaldry { namespace bindings {

template<typename Reader, typename Logger, typename Components, typename Commands>
struct CustomCli : name_<"CLI">
                 , author_<"Travis J. West">
                 , description_<"Generate a simple command line interface for inspecting and sending data to the bound components.">
                 , version_<"0.0.0">
                 , copyright_<"Copyright 2023 Sygaldry contributors">
                 , license_<"SPDX-License-Identifier: MIT">
{
    [[no_unique_address]] Logger log;
    [[no_unique_address]] Reader reader;
    [[no_unique_address]] Commands commands;

    void init()
    {
        log.println("CLI enabled. Write `help` for a list of available commands.");
        _prompt();
    }

    @{cli buffers}

    @{cli implementation details}

    @{cli process}
};

@{cli default type alias}

} }
// @/
```

# Testing Commands

The remainder of this document describes the commands available on the CLI. The
tests for these commands generally follow the same format, so a single test
function, similar to the one used for testing the CLI, is provided to simplify
the implementation and presentation of the tests. The command and components
are passed by reference to allow the main test case to check for expected
side-effects of running the command.

```cpp
// @='command test wrapper'
void test_command(auto&& command, auto&& components, int expected_retcode, string expected_output, auto ... args)
{
    int argc = 0;
    char * argv[sizeof...(args)];
    auto set_arg = [&](auto arg) {argv[argc++] = (char *)arg;};
    ( set_arg(args), ... );

    TestLogger logger{};
    logger.put.ss.str("");
    int retcode = command.main(argc, argv, logger, components);
    REQUIRE(retcode == expected_retcode);
    REQUIRE(logger.put.ss.str() == string(expected_output));
};
// @/
```

# First Commands: `list` and `help`

Recalling our earlier discussion of the basic functionality we require, two
commands, `list` and `help` stand out as particularly simple, since they don't
need to actually interact much with the components.

## Help Command

The help command is a bit unusual, since it actually doesn't care about
components, but rather commands. It should print each command's name, usage,
and a brief description. The name is easy enough, as is the description, since
it's reasonable to expect the command to provide both of these considering
there's no reasonable way to deduce them. It would be ideal if the usage text
could be derived by reflecting on the command, but enabling this would require
us to make assumptions about the way commands are shaped, since it's not
possible to deduce anything from the signature `int main(argc, argv, log,
components)`. For now, we'll take the easiest route and require commands to
provide their usage text if the command takes arguments.

```cpp
// @+'test commands'
struct Command1 {
    static _consteval auto name() { return "/test-command-1"; }
    static _consteval auto usage() { return "foo bar"; }
    static _consteval auto description() { return "Description 1"; }
};

struct Command2 {
    static _consteval auto name() { return "/test-command-2"; }
    // no arguments, no usage text
    static _consteval auto description() { return "Description 2"; }
};

struct TestCommands
{
    Command1 cmd1;
    Command2 cmd2;
};
// @/

// @+'tests'
TEST_CASE("Help command", "[cli][commands][help]")
{
    Help command;

    TestLogger logger{};
    logger.put.ss.str("");
    auto commands = TestCommands{};
    auto retcode = command.main(logger, commands);

    REQUIRE(logger.put.ss.str() == string("/test-command-1 foo bar\n    Description 1\n/test-command-2\n    Description 2\n/help\n    Describe the available commands and their usage\n"));
    REQUIRE(retcode == 0);
}
// @/
```

```cpp
// @#'commands/help.hpp'
#pragma once
/*
Copyright 2023 Travis J. West, https://traviswest.ca, Input Devices and Music Interaction Laboratory
(IDMIL), Centre for Interdisciplinary Research in Music Media and Technology
(CIRMMT), McGill University, Montréal, Canada, and Univ. Lille, Inria, CNRS,
Centrale Lille, UMR 9189 CRIStAL, F-59000 Lille, France

SPDX-License-Identifier: MIT
*/

#include <boost/pfr.hpp>
#include "utilities/consteval.hpp"

namespace sygaldry { namespace bindings { namespace clicommands {
struct Help
{
    static _consteval auto name() { return "/help"; }
    static _consteval auto usage() { return ""; }
    static _consteval auto description() { return "Describe the available commands and their usage"; }

    void _print(auto& log, auto&& command)
    {
        if constexpr (requires {command.usage();})
            log.println(command.name(), " ", command.usage());
        else
            log.println(command.name());
        log.println("    ", command.description());
    }

    int main(auto& log, auto& commands)
    {
        boost::pfr::for_each_field(commands, [&](auto&& command)
        {
            _print(log, command);
        });
        log.println(name());
        log.println("    ", description());
        return 0;
    }
};

} } }
// @/

// @+'commands headers'
#include "commands/help.hpp"
// @/

// @+'default commands'
clicommands::Help help;
// @/
```

## List Command

The list command should output a new-line separated list of component names:

```cpp
// @+'tests'
TEST_CASE("List command outputs", "[cli][commands][list]")
{
    test_command(List{}, TestComponents{},
                 0, "/Test_Component_A\n/Test_Component_B\n/Test_Component_1\n",
                 "list");
}
// @/
```

Notice that we expect the component names to be converted to OSC addresses. An
earlier version of the CLI used lower kebab case, which is arguably more
idiomatic to a CLI, but OSC addresses are preferred to enable reuse of the
`osc_match_pattern` subroutine for dispatching commands.

Since component names are `_consteval`, we can generate the whole expected
output at compile time. However, doing so is noticeably more complicated than
merely printing the correct output at runtime, and also imposes an increased
program size to statically store the generated strings, which needlessly
duplicates the names of components. Instead, we'll iterate over the component
types using a fold expression and print each one's name using the injected
logger.

```cpp
// @#'commands/list.hpp'
#pragma once
/*
Copyright 2023 Travis J. West, https://traviswest.ca, Input Devices and Music Interaction Laboratory
(IDMIL), Centre for Interdisciplinary Research in Music Media and Technology
(CIRMMT), McGill University, Montréal, Canada, and Univ. Lille, Inria, CNRS,
Centrale Lille, UMR 9189 CRIStAL, F-59000 Lille, France

SPDX-License-Identifier: MIT
*/

#include <type_traits>
#include "utilities/consteval.hpp"
#include "concepts/components.hpp"
#include "bindings/osc_string_constants.hpp"

namespace sygaldry { namespace bindings { namespace clicommands {

struct List
{
    static _consteval auto name() { return "/list"; }
    static _consteval auto usage() { return ""; }
    static _consteval auto description() { return "List the components available to interact with through the CLI"; }

    int main(int argc, char** argv, auto& log, auto& components)
    {
        for_each_component(components, [&](const auto& component)
        {
            log.println(osc_path_v< std::remove_cvref_t<decltype(component)>
                                  , std::remove_cvref_t<decltype(components)>
                                  >);
        });
        return 0;
    }
};

} } }
// @/

// @+'commands headers'
#include "commands/list.hpp"
// @/

// @+'default commands'
clicommands::List list;
// @/
```

# Component Commands

Commands in this section reflect over components to access their metadata,
set their values, and simulate an operational runtime.

## Describe

This command is used to get the metadata associated with an entity, as well as
its current value if it has one. The first argument is the component to study.
The second optional argument narrows the examination to a single endpoint.

```cpp
// @+'tests'
TEST_CASE("Descibe", "[bindings][cli][commands][describe]")
{
    auto components = TestComponents{};
    components.tc.inputs.button_in = 1;
    components.tc.inputs.bang_in();
    test_command(Describe{}, components, 0,
R"DESCRIBEDEVICE(entity: /Test_Component_1
  name: "Test Component 1"
  type:  component
  input:   /Test_Component_1/button_in
    name: "button in"
    type:  occasional int
    range: 0 to 1 (init: 0)
    value: (! 1 !)
  input:   /Test_Component_1/toggle_in
    name: "toggle in"
    type:  persistent int
    range: 0 to 1 (init: 0)
    value: 0
  input:   /Test_Component_1/slider_in
    name: "slider in"
    type:  persistent float
    range: 0 to 1 (init: 0)
    value: 0
  input:   /Test_Component_1/bang_in
    name: "bang in"
    type:  bang
    value: (! bang !)
  input:   /Test_Component_1/text_in
    name: "text in"
    type:  persistent text
    value: ""
  input:   /Test_Component_1/text_message_in
    name: "text message in"
    type:  occasional text
    value: ()
  input:   /Test_Component_1/array_in
    name: "array in"
    type:  array of float
    range: 0 to 1 (init: 0)
    value: [0 0 0]
  output:  /Test_Component_1/button_out
    name: "button out"
    type:  occasional int
    range: 0 to 1 (init: 0)
    value: (0)
  output:  /Test_Component_1/toggle_out
    name: "toggle out"
    type:  persistent int
    range: 0 to 1 (init: 0)
    value: 0
  output:  /Test_Component_1/slider_out
    name: "slider out"
    type:  persistent float
    range: 0 to 1 (init: 0)
    value: 0
  output:  /Test_Component_1/bang_out
    name: "bang out"
    type:  bang
    value: ()
  output:  /Test_Component_1/text_out
    name: "text out"
    type:  persistent text
    value: ""
  output:  /Test_Component_1/text_message_out
    name: "text message out"
    type:  occasional text
    value: ()
  output:  /Test_Component_1/array_out
    name: "array out"
    type:  array of float
    range: 0 to 1 (init: 0)
    value: [0 0 0]
)DESCRIBEDEVICE", "describe", "/Test_Component_1");

    test_command(Describe{}, TestComponents{}, 0,
R"DESCRIBEENDPOINT(entity: /Test_Component_1/slider_out
  name: "slider out"
  type:  persistent float
  range: 0 to 1 (init: 0)
  value: 0
)DESCRIBEENDPOINT", "describe", "/Test_Component_1/slider_out");
    components.tc.inputs.text_in = "hello";

    CHECK(components.tc.inputs.text_in.value == string("hello"));
    test_command(Describe{}, components, 0,
R"DESCRIBEENDPOINT(entity: /Test_Component_1/text_in
  name: "text in"
  type:  persistent text
  value: "hello"
)DESCRIBEENDPOINT", "describe", "/Test_Component_1/text_in");
}
// @/
```

Depending on whether there is one or two arguments besides the name of the
command, we either describe a component (recursively including its endpoints),
or we describe a single endpoint.

```cpp
// @='describe main'
template<typename Components>
int main(int argc, char** argv, auto& log, Components& components)
{
    if (argc < 2) return 2;
    bool describe_component = argc == 2;
    bool describe_endpoint = argc > 2;
    for_each_node(components, [&]<typename T>(T& node, auto)
    {
        if constexpr (has_name<T>)
            if (osc_match_pattern(argv[1], osc_path_v<T, Components>))
                describe_entity<T, Components>(log, "entity: ", node);
    });
    return 0;
};
// @/
```

We generically describe both components and endpoints using the same methods,
which reflect on the input entity using concepts, recursing over nested
entities where they are found. Note that `Bang` related branches need to appear
before others, since a `Bang` is currently implemented as a `PersistentValue`.
Similarly, since `OccasionalValue` merely imposes additional constraints on
those of `PersistentValue`, it should be checked before the latter.

```cpp
// @+'describe implementation details'
template<typename T>
void describe_entity_type(auto& log, T& entity)
{
    if constexpr (Bang<T>) log.println("bang");
    else if constexpr (has_value<T>)
    {
        if constexpr (OccasionalValue<T>)
        {
            if constexpr (array_like<value_t<T>>)
                log.print("array of ");
            else log.print("occasional ");
        }
        else if constexpr (PersistentValue<T>)
        {
            if constexpr (array_like<value_t<T>>)
                log.print("array of ");
            else log.print("persistent ");
        }
        if constexpr (std::integral<element_t<T>>)
            log.println("int");
        else if constexpr (std::floating_point<element_t<T>>)
            log.println("float");
        else if constexpr (string_like<element_t<T>>)
            log.println("text");
        else log.println("unknown value type");
    }
    else if constexpr (Component<T>) log.println("component");
    else log.println("unknown");
}

template<typename T>
void describe_entity_value(auto& log, T& entity)
{
    if constexpr (Bang<T>)
    {
        if (entity) log.println("(! bang !)");
        else log.println("()");
    }
    else if constexpr (OccasionalValue<T>)
    {
        if (entity) log.println("(! ", value_of(entity), " !)");
        else log.println("(", value_of(entity), ")");
    }
    else if constexpr (PersistentValue<T>)
    {
        if constexpr (tagged_write_only<T>) log.println("WRITE ONLY");
        else if constexpr (string_like<value_t<T>>)
            log.println("\"", value_of(entity), "\"");
        else log.println(value_of(entity));
    }
}

template<typename T, typename Components>
void describe_entity(auto& log, auto preface, T& entity, auto ... indents)
{
    static_assert(has_name<T>);
    log.println(indents..., preface, (const char *)osc_path_v<T, Components>);
    log.println(indents..., "  name: \"", entity.name(), "\"");
    log.print(indents...,   "  type:  ");
    describe_entity_type(log, entity);
    if constexpr (has_range<T>)
    {
        log.print(indents..., "  range: ");
        auto range = get_range<T>();
        log.println(range.min, " to ", range.max, " (init: ", range.init, ")");
    }
    if constexpr (has_value<T>)
    {
        log.print(indents...,   "  value: ");
        describe_entity_value(log, entity);
    }
    if constexpr (Component<T>)
    {
        auto describe_group = [&](auto& group, auto groupname)
        {
            boost::pfr::for_each_field(group, [&]<typename Y>(Y& endpoint)
            {
                describe_entity<Y, Components>(log, groupname, endpoint, "  ", indents...);
            });
        };
        if constexpr (has_inputs<T>) describe_group(inputs_of(entity),  "input:   ");
        if constexpr (has_outputs<T>) describe_group(outputs_of(entity), "output:  ");
    }
}
// @/
```
### Boilerplate

```cpp
// @#'commands/describe.hpp'
#pragma once
/*
Copyright 2023 Travis J. West, https://traviswest.ca, Input Devices and Music Interaction Laboratory
(IDMIL), Centre for Interdisciplinary Research in Music Media and Technology
(CIRMMT), McGill University, Montréal, Canada, and Univ. Lille, Inria, CNRS,
Centrale Lille, UMR 9189 CRIStAL, F-59000 Lille, France

SPDX-License-Identifier: MIT
*/

#include <boost/pfr.hpp>
#include "utilities/consteval.hpp"
#include "concepts/components.hpp"
#include "concepts/metadata.hpp"
#include "concepts/endpoints.hpp"
#include "bindings/osc_string_constants.hpp"
#include "bindings/osc_match_pattern.hpp"

namespace sygaldry { namespace bindings { namespace clicommands {

struct Describe
{
    static _consteval auto name() { return "/describe"; }
    static _consteval auto usage() { return "osc-address-pattern"; }
    static _consteval auto description() { return "Convey metadata about entities that match the given address pattern"; }

    @{describe implementation details}

    @{describe main}

};

} } } // namespaces
// @/

// @+'default commands'
clicommands::Describe describe;
// @/

// @+'commands headers'
#include "commands/describe.hpp"
// @/
```

## Set

This command sets the value of an endpoint, specified by the name of its parent
component and its own name (in that order). Note that this does not cause the
component's main subroutine to trigger under any circumstance, which is instead
done by the following command.

```cpp
// @+'tests'
TEST_CASE("Set", "[bindings][cli][commands][set]")
{
    auto components = TestComponents{};
    SECTION("set slider")
    {
        test_command(Set{}, components, 0, "", "/set", "/Test_Component_1/slider_in", "0.31459");
        REQUIRE(components.tc.inputs.slider_in.value == 0.31459f);
    }

    SECTION("set toggle")
    {
        REQUIRE(components.tc.inputs.toggle_in.value == 0);
        test_command(Set{}, components, 0, "", "/set", "/Test_Component_1/toggle_in", "1");
        REQUIRE(components.tc.inputs.toggle_in.value == 1);
    }

    SECTION("set button")
    {
        REQUIRE(not components.tc.inputs.button_in);
        test_command(Set{}, components, 0, "", "/set", "/Test_Component_1/button_in", "1");
        REQUIRE(components.tc.inputs.button_in);
        REQUIRE(components.tc.inputs.button_in.value() == 1);
    }

    SECTION("set bang")
    {
        test_command(Set{}, components, 0, "", "/set", "/Test_Component_1/bang_in");
        REQUIRE(components.tc.inputs.bang_in.value == true);
    }

    SECTION("set string")
    {
        test_command(Set{}, components, 0, "", "/set", "/Test_Component_1/text_in", "helloworld");
        REQUIRE(components.tc.inputs.text_in.value == string("helloworld"));
    }

    SECTION("set array")
    {
        test_command(Set{}, components, 0, "", "/set", "/Test_Component_1/array_in", "1", "2", "3");
        REQUIRE(components.tc.inputs.array_in.value == std::array<float, 3>{1,2,3});
    }
}
// @/
```

The main subroutine simply checks the arguments and tries to dispatch to the
right endpoint, deferring the main logic of the command to another subroutine.

```cpp
// @='set main'
template<typename Components>
int main(int argc, char** argv, auto& log, Components& components)
{
    if (argc < 2)
    {
        log.println("usage: ", usage());
        return 2;
    }
    auto component_name = argv[1];
    auto endpoint_name = argv[2];
    for_each_endpoint(components, [&]<typename T>(T& endpoint) {
        if (osc_match_pattern(argv[1], osc_path_v<T, Components>))
            set_endpoint_value(log, endpoint, argc-2, argv+2);
    });
    return 0;
}
// @/
```

Setting the value depends on the type of value. Bangs are set no matter what the
input. Otherwise, we require more information to parse in order to set the value.

```cpp
// @='set implementation details'
@{parse and set}

template<typename T>
int set_endpoint_value(auto& log, T& endpoint, int argc, char ** argv)
{
    if constexpr (Bang<T>)
    {
        if (argc != 0) log.println("Note: no arguments are required to set a bang.");
        set_value(endpoint, true);
        return 0;
    }
    else if constexpr (array_like<value_t<T>>)
    {
        if (argc < size<value_t<T>>())
        {
            log.println("Not enough arguments to set this endpoint.");
            return 2;
        }
        else return parse_and_set(log, endpoint, argc, argv);
    }
    else if constexpr (has_value<T>)
    {
        if (argc < 1)
        {
            log.println("Not enough arguments to set this endpoint.");
            return 2;
        }
        else return parse_and_set<value_t<T>>(log, endpoint, argv[0]);
    }
    else return 2;
}
// @/
```

`parse_and_set` is called in case a value needs to be parsed from the input
tokens. Most of these methods consists of checking for errors and returning a
failure code in case we can't parse the input token.

The case for a single-valued endpoint simply parses the given input string:

```cpp
// @='parse and set'
@{from_chars}

template<typename T>
int parse_and_set(auto& log, auto& endpoint, const char * argstart)
{
    auto argend = argstart;

    // search for the end of the token, with an arbitrary maximum upper bound
    for (int i = 0; *argend != 0 && i < 256; ++i, ++argend) {}
    if (*argend != 0) 
    {
        log.println("Unable to parse number, couldn't find end of token");
        return 2;
    }
    bool success = false;
    T val = from_chars<T>(argstart, argend, success);
    if (success)//ec == std::errc{})
    {
        endpoint = val;
        return 0;
    }
    else
    {
        log.println("Unable to parse token '", argstart, "'");
        return 2;
    }
}
// @/
```

The case for an array-like endpoint needs to iterate over the input strings:

```cpp
// @+'parse and set'
int parse_and_set(auto& log, auto& endpoint, int argc, char ** argv)
{
    for (int i = 0; i < argc; ++i)
    {
        using T = decltype(value_of(endpoint)[0]);
        auto ret = parse_and_set<std::remove_cvref_t<T>>(log, value_of(endpoint)[i], argv[i]);
        if (ret != 0) return ret;
    }
    return 0;
}
// @/
```

For converting from a token string to a number, we would like to
simply use the standard library `from_chars`, but the ESP-IDF doesn't
appear to have implemented the floating point overloads for this
function at the time of writing. We define our own `from_chars`
function that wraps the standard library when available, and falls
back to `strtoX` otherwise.

```cpp
// @='from_chars'
template<typename T>
    requires std::integral<T>
T from_chars(const char * start, const char * end, bool& success)
{
    T ret{};
    auto [ptr, ec] = std::from_chars(start, end, ret);
    if (ec == std::errc{}) success = true;
    else success = false;
    return ret;
}

template<typename T>
    requires std::floating_point<T>
T from_chars(const char * start, const char * end, bool& success)
{
#ifdef ESP_PLATFORM
    char * e;
    T ret;
    if constexpr (std::is_same_v<T, float>)
        ret = std::strtof(start, &e);
    else if constexpr (std::is_same_v<T, double>)
        ret = std::strtod(start, &e);
    else if constexpr (std::is_same_v<T, long double>)
        ret = std::strtold(start, &e);
    if (start == e) success = false;
    else success = true;
    return ret;
#else
    T ret;
    auto [ptr, ec] = std::from_chars(start, end, ret);
    if (ec == std::errc{}) success = true;
    else success = false;
    return ret;
#endif
}
// @/
```

For "parsing" a string, we simply return the token itself.

```cpp
// @+'from_chars'
template<typename T>
    requires requires (T t, const char * s) {t = s;}
T from_chars(const char * start, const char *, bool& success)
{
    success = true;
    return start;
}
// @/
```


### Boilerplate

```cpp
// @#'commands/set.hpp'
#pragma once
/*
Copyright 2023 Travis J. West, https://traviswest.ca, Input Devices and Music Interaction Laboratory
(IDMIL), Centre for Interdisciplinary Research in Music Media and Technology
(CIRMMT), McGill University, Montréal, Canada, and Univ. Lille, Inria, CNRS,
Centrale Lille, UMR 9189 CRIStAL, F-59000 Lille, France

SPDX-License-Identifier: MIT
*/

#include <charconv>
#include "concepts/endpoints.hpp"
#include "bindings/osc_string_constants.hpp"
#include "bindings/osc_match_pattern.hpp"

namespace sygaldry { namespace bindings { namespace clicommands {

struct Set
{
    static _consteval auto name() { return "/set"; }
    static _consteval auto usage() { return "component-name endpoint-name [value] [value] [...]"; }
    static _consteval auto description() { return "Change the current value of the given endoint"; }

    @{set implementation details}

    @{set main}

};

} } }
// @/

// @+'commands headers'
#include "commands/set.hpp"
// @/

// @+'default commands'
clicommands::Set set;
// @/
```

# Summary

# Building Tests

```cpp
// @#'tests/tests.cpp'
/*
Copyright 2023 Travis J. West, https://traviswest.ca, Input Devices and Music Interaction Laboratory
(IDMIL), Centre for Interdisciplinary Research in Music Media and Technology
(CIRMMT), McGill University, Montréal, Canada, and Univ. Lille, Inria, CNRS,
Centrale Lille, UMR 9189 CRIStAL, F-59000 Lille, France

SPDX-License-Identifier: MIT
*/

#include <string>
#include <memory>
#include <catch2/catch_test_macros.hpp>
#include "utilities/consteval.hpp"
#include "concepts/components.hpp"
#include "components/tests/testcomponent.hpp"
#include "bindings/basic_logger/test_logger.hpp"
#include "bindings/basic_reader/test_reader.hpp"
#include "bindings/cli/cli.hpp"

using std::string;

using namespace sygaldry::bindings::clicommands;
using namespace sygaldry::bindings;
using namespace sygaldry;

@{cli tests logger}

@{cli test wrapper}

@{command test wrapper}

@{test commands}

@{test components}

@{tests}
// @/
```

```cmake
# @#'tests/CMakeLists.txt'
add_executable(cli-tests tests.cpp)
target_link_libraries(cli-tests PRIVATE Catch2::Catch2WithMain)
catch_discover_tests(cli-tests)
# @/
```

## CLI Component

The CLI can also be treated as a component. There are a few clear approaches that could
be taken here to get the character inputs, broadly similar to the possibilities for
sending text to the output. In keeping with that previous discussion, we will
model the character input as a plugin component.
